feat: add document load under Frontend and Mobile Monitoring (#1023)
SigNoz/signoz.io: blog/2023-08-09-signoz-the-datadog-alternative-releases-their-visual-query-builder.md

---

> title: SigNoz, the open-source DataDog alternative, releases our visual query builder

Reviewer: I am not sure about the title. It feels more to be a title for a post when shared on social channels. I am thinking from a perspective of a user who lands on our blog page. For them, it might make more sense to have a title like `Exploring capabilities of our new Trace and Logs Explorer` or `Exploring capabilities of our new visual query builder for traces and logs`.  We should also think about whether we refer to this more as Trace and Logs explorer or query builder. 

But feel free to take the call on this @serverless-mom . If the idea is more about sharing on socials, we can go with this title.

Reviewer 2: yeah agreed, changed!

description: The team at SigNoz would like to share recent developments released this month that greatly enhance the ability to dynamically query your trace and log data. With these tools anyone can explore complex OpenTelemetry data and gain insight into their stack.
image: /img/blog/2023/08/query-builder/query-builder-cover.jpg
hide_table_of_contents: true
keywords:
 - OpenTelemetry
 - Clickhouse
---

<head>
  <link rel="canonical" href="https://signoz.io/blog/clickhouse-query-compare-two-spans/"/>
</head>

The team at SigNoz would like to share recent developments released this month that greatly enhance the ability to dynamically query your trace and log data. With these tools anyone can explore complex OpenTelemetry data and gain insight into their stack.

<!--truncate-->

![Cover Image](/img/blog/2023/08/query-builder/query-builder-cover.webp)

## Taking ClickHouse Queries beyond SQL

We've talked recently about how ClickHouse, the datastore that SigNoz uses, [allows powerful queries into your observability data.](https://signoz.io/blog/clickhouse-query-compare-two-spans/) But with any query language you're going to limit the reach of your data for two reasons:

> * Only those who can write queries can build new charts

Reviewer: `- **Only those who can write queries can build new charts**<br></br>`

Will be better formatted this way. Currently, there is no line break before the para starts.

While ClickHouse queries are written in SQL and should be familiar to many many developers, the goal of DevOps is, after all, a sharing of operational and dev knowledge as far as possible. Requiring everyone to write queries will always have limits, creating one group who create dashboards and another who just view them.

> * You often have to know what data is present to work with it

Reviewer: Same for the second bullet point.

> I'll say that as a die-hard SQL user you absolutely *can* explore your data just using queries. But it's immensely helpful in this query builder that completions for your queries, both with attribute names *and* attribute values. Like in this example where I wanted to look at log lines only for a single container ID. Instead of having to query and pick an ID, some frequent values are suggested by the explorer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I'll say that as a die-hard SQL user, you absolutely *can* explore your data just using queries. But it's immensely helpful in this query builder that completions for your queries, both with attribute names *and* attribute values. For example, I wanted to look at log lines only for a single container ID. Instead of having to query and pick an ID, the explorer suggests some frequent values.
```

Reviewer: @serverless-mom, nothing wrong with yours except the missing full stop. I usually run the blogs with Grammarly once to check for improvements.

<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/blog/2023/08/query-builder/suggestion-values.webp" alt="The newly shipped logs explorer will help you create powerful queries on your logs data"/>
    <figcaption><i>Attributes, comparators, and values all get auto-suggested</i></figcaption>
</figure>

> Let's talk about what else these features enable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's talk about what else the new Explorer pages enable:
```

### 1. Compare results by charting multiple queries together

Comparison may be the death of joy, but with our multiple query interface you can create a perfect way to find correlations, compare performance, or just see trends.

<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/blog/2023/08/query-builder/multiple-queries.webp" alt="The newly shipped logs explorer will help you create powerful queries on your logs data"/>
    <figcaption><i>Both formulae will be charted on the same y-scale</i></figcaption>
</figure>

You can customize the legends on charts to make the results more readable

### 2. Timeseries, tables, and lists

> Every observability dashboard tool is going to need custom data views, because no one knows what your data really means better than you do. It may be that timeseries like the one above are meaningful, but you may prefer a simple list of results

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every observability dashboard tool is going to need custom data views, because no one knows what your data really means better than you do. It may be that timeseries like the one above are meaningful, but you may prefer a simple list of results.
```

    <figcaption><i>A raw list of results</i></figcaption>
</figure>

or a table view that aggregates results together:

<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/blog/2023/08/query-builder/table-view.webp" alt="The newly shipped logs explorer will help you create powerful queries on your logs data"/>
    <figcaption><i>Tables will show all results from the time window selected at the top right, customize this in the settings after adding this chart to a dashboard</i></figcaption>
</figure>

It may be that time correlation isn't the goal, you can still add lists and table views to your dashboards!

### 3. Alerts based on your queries
Directly from results you can add the query to a dashboard and set up an alert. For logs, this makes the timeseries view especially useful, as you can now create an alert when a certain event is logged beyond a certain rate.

<figure data-zoomable align='center'>
    <img src="/img/blog/2023/08/query-builder/alerts-threshold.webp" alt="The newly shipped logs explorer will help you create powerful queries on your logs data"/>
    <figcaption><i>A preview of when your alert would have gone off</i></figcaption>
</figure>

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: @serverless-mom the conclusion sounds a bit self-applauding :) My suggestion would be to tone it down a bit and maybe make it more about the explorer pages itself. For example, cite some more use cases os using the explorer pages.

Reviewer 2: revised to tone it down :)

In the ever-evolving landscape of observability tools, SigNoz continues to make significant strides towards providing an open-source alternative to proprietary solutions. The latest addition to their arsenal, the visual query builder, represents a pivotal step in democratizing the accessibility and utility of complex OpenTelemetry data.

By addressing the inherent limitations of query-based exploration, SigNoz has broken down barriers that often restrict meaningful engagement with observability data.

SigNoz's visual query builder is a testament to the project's commitment to accessibility, user-friendliness, and community-driven development. With this month's release, SigNoz solidifies our position as a compelling alternative to proprietary tools, offering a comprehensive toolkit to unlock the full potential of OpenTelemetry data exploration and analysis.

> [Try SigNoz cloud](https://signoz.io/teams/) to get started today gathering and sharing your OpenTelemetry data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Try SigNoz cloud](https://signoz.io/teams/) to get started quickly and unlock the full potential of your OpenTelemetry data.
```
